At the moment, we will move on to the next topic of our course, namely, linear programming.
Let's start a little bit from afar. Imagine that you need to solve an equation, a solution that you
cannot imagine. Well, let's say that you forgot the math course, and you want to solve the equation,
for example, the form of cosine x is equal to sine x. The solution is quite simple, there are two angles, 45
plus 180 would be 225 degrees, or in terms of pi, it is pi by 4, and, accordingly, pi plus pi by 4. But let's say
that you forgot the math course and want to solve this equation. Can modern tools help you,
for example, the Excel program? Yes, they can. Excel has a function called parameter selection,
or in English goal seek. With its help, you can select one variable so that your equation is solved.
Goal seek or parameter selection allows you to solve almost all equations. Unfortunately,
this equation is only one variable, and there can be any degree, any complexity, but, alas,
as I said, only one variable. There are some subtleties when solving such problems, but nevertheless.
As an example, we will now see how to solve the equation sine x is equal to cosine x with the help of goal seek.
As I said, the solution of the simplest equations is possible in the search function. Let's try.
We have a simple equation sine x is equal to cosine x.
Well, of course, in order to solve it in Excel, you will need to write it a little differently.
Okay, one of our cells we will call x, put the value one there for now, we will call it x,
well, as you can see, since we have sine one minus cosine one is equal to 0.3. Now we will use the
parameter selection function to find such a value x so that our equation is executed.
Sine x is equal to cosine x. This is done in the new Excel in the part of working with data,
in the part of the analysis of what if. The parameter selection function offers to set the value of the cell C5
equal to 0 to execute our equation, change the value of the cell C4.
Okay,
well, as you can see, Excel has not reached 0, but these are two hundred thousandths,
this is practically zero. If you want, you can change the accuracy and check the solution with a
higher accuracy. Well, as we expected, the solution is approximately pi by half. Let's check,
I will multiply this number by 4, sorry, pi by 4, of course, multiply it by 4 and see what it is. Yes,
3, 3, 14, practically 1, 5, 9 should be in the real pi. Now pay attention, if we set another initial
value, for example, the value 5, then we will get a completely different solution to this equation.
Let's try. Data, analysis, what if, parameter selection, set cell C5, value equal to 0,
change the value of cell C4. Okay, as you can see, we got a different value. And no matter what initial
value we started with, or rather, not so, since equations have many solutions, there are two
pi-periodic solutions, then starting with different initial values, we will get different solutions.
Okay, let's move on to more serious tasks, tasks of the functions of several variables.
Okay, we looked at how simple equations are solved using parameter selection, it's time to talk
about more difficult tasks. Of course, tasks in life are much more difficult, most often,
and another function of Excel will help us in this, namely, it is called a search for a solution or a
solver in English. In fact, a solver, a search for a solution, is a program that allows you to
implement linear programming on Excel. What is linear programming? Linear programming is
the search for the optimal solution in a situation when some of your data is limited.
It is not limited in the sense that you do not have enough data, but in the sense that you impose a limit,
for example, you want to make the bathroom at home as large as possible, but at the same time its depth
should not be more than one meter. This is an example of such a typical limitation. The previous function,
which we discussed, goal seek, does not allow you to impose a limit. In addition, it allows you to
solve problems with only one variable. A solver allows you to work with functions of many variables.
Of course, we understand that, for example, the profit of the enterprise is always a function of many variables.
This is a function of, I don't know, cost, a function of the cost of sale, a function of the number of sales
in our nominal expression, a function of our constant costs, variable costs, and so on.
A solver allows you to work with a large number of functions. To be fair, I must say that not always and not everywhere,
but nevertheless, a solver is a much more advanced tool. In addition, a solver allows two-digit
variables. You cannot sell 2.3 cars, for example. You sell either 2 or 3. In this regard, to be honest,
whole variables in a solver work poorly, but this is better than nothing. In the end, this is the only
actually available solution to the problem of linear programming. In addition, a solver offers
things like analysis of solutions. We will now look at an example, but for now we can say that, for example,
such a task. You produce a mixture of nuts, and one of the types of nuts is over. A person comes and asks,
I know that you have run out of such nuts, for example, a hazelnut is over, but do you want to take it,
but it is one and a half times more expensive than you usually take. And you need to understand whether it is beneficial
or not. Can you afford to buy this nut so that you stay within your cost, so that your loss does not decrease,
so that you do not get into losses. At the same time, a solver can be used in macros. If there is time,
I can show you how macros work in Excel. A solver allows you to use various search methods.
At the same time, what is the problem? Solver, imagine, I will show this with my hand,
imagine this function, which has two minimums, the main minimum and the second minimum, smaller,
on the contrary, larger. Having entered the second small minimum, which is not global, but a local minimum,
a solver will not be able to get out of it, because it does not search like a cat, it does not go through the
variable, it just looks for the derivative and looks where it should go next. If it gets into a hole,
it will never get out of this hole. Since it cannot get out of it, it needs to be helped, the initial
value of the variables must be shifted so that it is on the other side of the small hole.
We will talk in more detail about the type of limitation, the existing type of limitation when we solve the problem,
but in principle there are limitations on the budget. This is when you are preparing to spend money for the
New Year and think about how much you have to buy, and at the same time you understand that your budget is
limited, for example, by three or five thousand rubles. There are restrictions on non-negativity,
for example, let's say you are a metallurgical company, you produce alloys, if you sell a
negative amount of some alloy, it means that you buy this alloy, in principle, you disassemble it into
a component and use it in others. This is probably not very correct. The limitation can be there for
extreme risk, and as I said, there can be a limitation on the whole, non-whole, and so on,
on the binary, non-binary, and so on. Let's talk about using silver right now.
Let's consider the following task. You work, you own a company that produces a mixture of nuts.
The nut mixture is called nut-nut plus premium-lux, and consists of the corresponding
number of different types of nuts. Here, in this line, the number of nuts in the percentage of the
components of this mixture is indicated, of course, in weight percentages. If you look,
the amount of each line will be 100. Check it out, make sure you don't doubt it.
The mixture is sold at different prices. You have a certain number of different types of nuts on the
slide. You have a purchase price, and you want to maximize, let's call it a profit. It's not
exactly a profit, of course, because you still have operating costs and so on. But in this case,
let's call it an operating profit. For the sake of brevity, we will say profit. Once again,
you buy peanuts for $2 per kilogram, hazelnuts for $3, Brazilian nuts for $2, and so on.
The most expensive nut is cedar, the most expensive mixture is premium-lux. The number of nuts in our warehouse
is completely different. What do we do next? We will change the production of our mixtures in this way.
Look, if I now put another number here, then you will see how the number of nuts used in the line
will change. For example, I put number 10 here, and we have a change in the growth of peanuts, of course,
since we added 9 kilograms of nuts to the mixed mixture. Accordingly, 9 kilograms of new
peanuts give us 4.2 additional. And for example, to demonstrate again, I will add another 10
kilograms of luxury production mixture, and we will expect that now we will not need 300 grams of cedar nut,
as it was before, but 200-300 grams. So it is. Now pay attention, here in these three cells
our sales are counted. Sales are just the sum of paired products, the price of sales per production.
Here the function XL is used, the sum of sales, or it has an English name. Accordingly, our costs
are also considered, using the same function, the sum of sales, as the price per used
quantity of the corresponding nut. And of course, our profit is considered as the difference between our
sales and our costs. We want to use the function, or rather the XL overhaul, which is called the search
for a solution. In order to use it, you need to install it first. You should probably turn to your
manual, that is, to the reference system, because in different versions this happens in a slightly different way.
Almost certainly, if you do not have this setting installed, and by default it is not installed,
you will need to resort to the help of your system, not system, but distributive disk.
Okay, we want to use the search for a solution setting.
So, how is the conclusion of this function arranged? He asks what target function we want to see.
First of all, we choose the target function, the target cell, and choose the profit. As we agreed,
as we know, the purpose of any company is to get its profits by exploiting a person.
We will maximize profits by changing production. We will have to impose certain restrictions,
for example, on the consumption of our nuts, since we understand that we cannot spend
peanuts more than 300 kilograms and, accordingly, walnuts, oh, sorry,
cedar nuts more than 100 kilograms. These are the so-called budget restrictions.
And besides, we will now see that other restrictions will be needed.
We clicked the Execute button. At the same time, Excel gives us some kind of optimal solution.
Okay, let's see what happened. We have a negative value in the production graph.
What does this mean? From the point of view of Excel, from the point of view of its implementation of linear programming,
we can buy a nut mixture, disassemble it into component parts and use it in practice.
We probably won't like it very much, so I suggest adding another restriction.
It is clear that our production should not be less than zero. Let's run the search again.
You will see for yourself that the numbers of the new solution will differ significantly.
We will add another restriction. See how it happens. Click the Add button.
The reference to the cell. Here you can use block references. Not less than or equal to, but greater than or equal to.
Greater than or equal to zero. Pay attention to the drop-down menu. Less than or equal to is equal,
greater than or equal to is whole or double. It is best to use less than or equal to,
less than or equal to or greater than or equal to. Whole values greatly increase the disarray of the task,
the size of the task. Accordingly, Excel will take much longer to sort out its solution.
The value is equal, a very tough value. Accordingly, it will be much more difficult for Excel to solve what you have set.
We'll talk a little later about how to deal with this. For now, let's use the search function again.
As you can see, Excel gave such a result. It is clear that it is zero. Nothing special will change.
What happened? We ran out of hazelnuts, we ran out of cedar nuts. And that is why it turned out that the margin
for the sale of the nut mixture Lux is quite high. All the rest. We ran out of cedar nuts at first,
and at the same time we ran out of hazelnuts. After that, since the hazelnut is part of all the mixes,
we cannot sell anything else. Let's try to start with a few other initial conditions in order to see
what happens if we had more hazelnuts at first. Then we will simply come to the conclusion that
some other nut will run out, and hazelnuts should not necessarily be the first to run out.
Once again, we run the search for a solution. Sometimes it takes some time.
Okay. Now pay attention. Now not all sales are related to cedar nuts. As you can see,
cedar nuts are used completely. This is normal. We have used peanuts completely, hazelnuts, of course,
not completely, and pecans are used completely. Cedar nuts are used completely. Then there is such a task.
Imagine that you are in such a situation when you run out of peanuts, run out of pecans,
and run out of cedar nuts. Someone comes to you and offers to buy, for example, 200 kilograms of cedar
nuts, or let it be 200 kilograms of pecans, but not 4 dollars per kilogram, but 8 dollars per kilogram.
Yes, the price is higher than your usual price, but on the other hand, while you do not have pecans,
if you cannot get it anywhere on the market, then you cannot produce more than one nut mix.
How to solve this problem? Is it worth buying twice as expensive? It turns out that Excel gives us
such an answer. We will run the search again and ask Excel to choose
as a type of report. Pay attention. I don't know why Microsoft chose the name for this
graph, the Lagrange multiplier, in fact, the name is much more understandable and intuitive. This is a shadow price.
In principle, before such an amount, you must be ready to pay for 1 kilogram of pecans.
Let's say, having paid up to 22 dollars, you have not yet lost. This number shows the point where you
will work at zero, having bought the corresponding nut at this price. You saw how Solver works,
which is a search for solutions. As I promised, we will talk about how to use the restrictions that we can
impose on solving our tasks. Of course, the best restrictions are the non-strict restrictions
on the top and bottom, that is, less or equal. Restrictions such as equal, which sometimes
want to be used, significantly complicate the work of this tool. Therefore, as a solution,
in this case, you can probably suggest the following. Try not to give Solver strictly,
let's say that the total production of nuts is 50 kilograms. Try to give him a chance to
fluctuate within, for example, plus or minus 1 tenth of 50 kilograms, that is, from 49.9 to 50.1.
At the same time, Solver will not experience significant jumps and will work much more
stably. It will take much less time, and its solution will be much more accurate,
much more acceptable for you. What does the solution to the task in space look like?
Imagine that, for example, you have only two nuts. Then in space it looks like this. You have one axis,
this is one nut, the second axis is another nut, and a certain plane, which is your profit,
which depends on how much you have produced. Perhaps not so, perhaps one axis will be one
nut, and the other will be another nut. Accordingly, the plane in space is your profit. The restrictions
that we impose, they cut off certain parts of our plane in space, the plane of solutions.
Accordingly, our plane from an infinite plane turns into a limited figure. If we
start maximizing the function, then this function can take maximum value only
either at the point where several solutions converge, or at the edge, and so on. In space,
it looks like a certain limited figure, with several possible sides. It is difficult to imagine
yourself in more than three-dimensional space, so it is quite possible to imagine it in three-dimensional
space. Try to do it. What else is necessary to talk about? The solver, of
course, works best on linear tasks, but this does not mean that it cannot be used for non-linear
solutions. However, as I said, at the same time it can find a certain local minimum,
or local maximum, respectively, without finding a global minimum or maximum. The only way to
do this is to move to solutions from different sides, that is, from different starting points.
Unfortunately, this is the only possible option in this case. As for the fairness of the solution,
well, if we do not talk about the possibility of locking the solver in one of the existing
minimums, then the solver solution is good enough. Nevertheless, if you have a lot of variables,
try to get it out of balance. The solver should be applied many times already according to the finished solution,
try to get it out of balance, changing the initial conditions a little, or perhaps even
changing the initial conditions quite a lot. Okay, now we have talked with you about linear
programming, and according to the existing tradition, I will ask you two simple tasks. The first of them,
they are both approximately similar to logistics, in both of them you can apply a certain common
operational principle. Imagine such a situation. At night, four people stand in front of a narrow bridge across the river.
One of them is fast enough and can walk along the bridge in one minute, the other in two minutes, the third in five,
and the fourth in ten. Well, such a grandmother, elderly at all. The bridge is quite old and does not withstand the weight of more
than two people. In addition, there is no railing on the bridge, so since it is impossible to walk along it at night
without a flashlight. There is a flashlight, but it is only one. That is, someone must pass this flashlight.
Unfortunately, they cannot throw it over, because they risk dropping it. And the task is, of course,
in what minimum time can we transfer all our people who approached this bridge to the other side of the
river. As a hint, as I said, here, when solving this task, it is necessary to use a
common operational principle. This was the first hint. If you don't want to wait for the second hint,
then stop the lecture now, the second hint will be a little later. The second hint. The result should
be less than 19 minutes. The solution is as it is given at the end of the lecture. Another task. It is called
camel logistics. The task is this. There is a banana plantation on one edge of the desert, a thousand kilometers wide,
and a store on the other. The yield of bananas this year was 3,000 pieces. We have one and only
means of transport, namely a camel. This is a modern camel. It is equipped with a self-loading and
self-unloading device, a cruise stability system, GPS navigation, and so on. The payload of this camel is
1000 bananas. But in order for the camel not to starve, it must eat one banana per kilometer.
It doesn't matter whether it carries 1000 bananas, 20 bananas, or nothing at all. It must eat anyway.
The task is set as follows. What is the maximum number of bananas a camel can carry to the store?
Once again. The width of the desert is 1000 kilometers. The payload of the camel is 1000 bananas,
3,000 pieces of crop. It eats one banana per kilometer. What is the maximum number of bananas
a camel can carry from the plantation to the store? And a hint that was mentioned in the previous task.
When solving this task, one general operational principle should be used.